
# LAW of TITAN

## 1.0 INTRODUCTION

1.1 TITAN is a fantasy wargame for two to six players. Each player will move, muster, and engage in combat with his forces of monstrous characters. The prime component of each player's forces is the Titan.  Each player receives only one Titan, and if it is lost the player is out of the game and all of his forces are removed from play. The object of the game is to have the only Titan left in play, all the others having been eliminated.


1.2 TITAN involves two areas of player interaction: Masterplay and Battle. The strategic area, Masterplay, involves the movement of each player's forces from Land to Land on the Masterboard (game mapboard). Tile forces that are moved about the Masterboard are called character counters and are grouped into Legions. When a Legion is moved into a Land on the Masterboard which contains another player's Legion, the two Legions are locked in an Engagement. An Engagement must result in the complete elimination of at least one of the involved Legions, and may pit the two Legions against each other in a tactical Battle upon the Battleland corresponding to the Land of the Engagement.


1.3 TITAN is played in a series of turns called Game-Turns. During each turn one player gets a chance to move his Legions on the Masterboard, attack other players' Legions in Engagements, and muster new characters to increase the size and strength of his Legions.


1.4 Battle is resolved in a series of Maneuver Phases and Strike Phases during which the players involved commit the characters in their Legions to combat upon the Battleland which corresponds to the Land where the Engagement is taking place. 




## 2.0 GAME EQUIPMENT

2.1 The Masterboard is the game map upon which the strategic level of TITAN is played. The Masterboard is a network of 96 spaces representing the Lands of TITAN. These Lands are divided among 11 different types of terrain, and each Land is named and numbered for easy reference. The Lands are connected by Signs set on their interlocking borders which regulate the movement of Legions around the Masterboard (see section 7.0). The blank areas among and beyond the Lands are voids that Legions may not cross nor enter. In each of the four corners of the Masterboard is a Masterchart which details the characters available to be mustered in the various terrains.

2.2 The Battlelands are displayed on the front and back of six separate sheets. They are the arenas of Battle. Each Battleland depicts one of the 11 terrains of the Masterboard and is divided into 27 hexes. Some of these hexes contain hazards which may affect the movement and combat ability of the characters.

2.3 TITAN includes nine counter sheets containing 621 cardboard playing pieces. The playing pieces are divided into character counters, hit chits, and Legion Markers. Legion Markers are identified by a unique pictogram; there are six color coded sets of 12 markers, each with a corresponding Titan counter. Titan counters display the word TITAN and the symbol "X-4" upon a caped silhouette. The other counters represent the various characters in the game. Above each character's silhouette is its name, and below are its Battle-Factors. Hit chits are the number counters which are used during Battles to indicate damage.

2.4 The LAW OF TITAN is a 12 page rulebook detailing how the game is played.

2.5 TITAN includes four six-sided dice which are used to determine the distance that Legions are moved on the Masterboard and to
represent tile strikes of characters in Battle.



## 3.0 CHARACTERS
Characters are the basic units of the game which make up each player's forces. They are organized into Legions on the Masterboard, but maneuver and fight separately when deployed for Battle on a Battleland. Characters can be of three classes: Lords, Demi-Lords, and Creatures. All of the different characters in the game are listed on the Character Chart (see rear cover).

3.1 Lords are divided into three types: Titans, Angels, and Archangels.  Each player begins the game with one Titan and one Angel. More Angels and then Archangels may be acquired as the game continues (see 16.0). A player may never have more than one Titan in play.  Lords possess the special power of teleportation (see 8.0). The existence of a player's Titan assures that player's continued existence in the game.

3.2 Guardians and Warlocks are the two types of Demi-Lords. They can only be recruited in Tower Lands on the Masterboard (see 18.4).  They differ from Creatures in that they are returned to the caretaker's stacks when they are destroyed, and can be mustered again. Warlocks possess some special powers used in Battle (see 13.5)


3.3 Creatures are the other 19 types of characters that can be mustered from the various terrains of the Masterboard. Creatures, such as Ogres, Lions, and Dragons, form the bulk of the player's forces. Once slain, Creatures are permanently removed from the game.

3.4 Each character counter displays the character's name, its silhouette, its Battle-factors, and any symbols denoting special abilities. The left hand Battle-factor is the Power-factor; this is the number of dice the character rolls when it strikes and is the number of hits it must take before it is slain. The right hand Battle-factor is the Skill-factor; this affects the character's relative skill in giving and taking damage, and is also the character's movement allowance during Battle. Some characters may have a lightning bolt and/or star symbol placed between their Battle-factors.  These symbols indicate that this character has the ability to rangestrike (lightning bolt) or fly (star).


3.5 CHARACTER CHART (see Rulebook rear cover)




## 4.0 LEGIONS
Legions are the basic formations of play for the strategic area of the game, Masterplay. Each Legion is comprised of a group of character counters stacked underneath an identifying Legion Marker of the owning player's color. Each Legion is placed on one of the Lands of the Masterboard, with no more than one Legion per Land. Legions move (and engage in combat) as a single entity. A character cannot be moved on the Masterboard except as a member of a Legion; Legions cannot drop characters off, although characters can be split from Legions to form new Legions.


4.1 Legions may contain a maximum of seven characters. While seven high they cannot muster or summon other characters (see sections 14.0, 15.0, and 18.0). A seven high Legion may continue to move normally and may be teleported (see sections 7.0 and 8.0). If at any time a Legion is found to contain more than seven counters, its characters are immediately revealed and its largest Creatures (by value) are removed until it has no more than seven characters (if it lacks Creatures, remove Demi-Lords, then Archangels, then Angels). It is then returned to its Land.


4.2 No Legion may exist without a proper Legion Marker. Each player receives a color coded set of 12 Legion Markers, which allows him to have up to 12 Legions on the Masterboard at any given time. A player can add a Legion to the Masterboard only if he has a marker available that is not already in play, and is able to split one of his Legions. To be able to field more than 12 Legions a player must eliminate another player, thereby gaining the use of the eliminated player's Legion Markers.


4.3 When a Legion splits, both the old and the new Legion must contain at least two characters, and all of the characters that they contain must have been in the old Legion before the split. The new Legion's characters are removed from the old Legion and placed beneath their own marker; players do not reveal which characters they split off. The new Legion stack is considered to be in the same Land as the old Legion, but one of them must be moved in that Game-Turn, if possible. They may both be moved, but they may not move to the same Land. If neither can move due to the presence of other friendly Legions, the new Legion is aborted and all of the characters remain in the one original Legion. Note that it is also possible to split a sufficiently large Legion into three Legions, each composed of at least too characters. A three way split is permissible, even if only one of the new Legions will be able to move this turn.


4.4 Any Legion that loses all of its characters is eliminated; its marker is returned to its owner, who may use it again when he wishes to start another Legion.


4.5 The character counters in a Legion are stacked face down on the Masterboard underneath the Legion Marker, so that even if a stack is disturbed, it’s character are not revealed. A player who wishes to examine one of his own stacks should leave its marker on the Land which it occupies as he does so, and he should not examine more than one of his Legions at a time. If a player accidentally disturbs another player’s Legions so that at least one counter is revealed, the offended player may look through any one of the offending player's Legions, revealing it if he so desires.  

4.6 A player may not use another player's Legion Markers unless he has eliminated that player. A player may not transfer or share command of his Legions, nor may he trade or transfer characters with other players or among his own Legions, except when splitting off a new Legion or summoning an Angel (see section 15.0). Once a Legion is placed on the Masterboard (and it does not abort) it remains in play until either all of its characters or its Titan have been eliminated. No player may simply choose to remove one of his own Legions or one belonging to any other player.  offended player


4.7 Player's cannot exchange Legion Markers between Legions in play, or change a Legion's Marker. Markers in use remain in play until the respective Legion is eliminated. A new Legion Marker is added only when an existing Legion is split.  



## 5.0 STARTING MASTERPLAY
The Masterboard is placed in the center of the table to be played on. Each player takes a set of 12 Legion Markers and the Titan counter of the same color. One player should be selected to act as the caretaker; he will distribute the character counters as they are required. The counters should be sorted by character and stacked nearby so as to be visible to all players.  The Battlelands can be set aside until they are needed to resolve an Engagement. Another player should be selected as the scorekeeper, and will need pen and paper. Place the dice on the table where they are available to all players.  

5.1 Each player rolls one die to determine which Tower Land his Legion will begin in If players roll the same number or roll the number of a Tower Land already assigned to another player, they must roll again. (Note that the Tower Lands are numbered in multiples of 100, but for this determination the zeros are ignored.) The player assigned the highest numbered Tower will play first, 

5.2 Each player begins the game with two Legions, both of which must start on the assigned Tower Land. The player's Titan is placed in one Legion and an Angel is placed in the other. Each player also receives two of each of the Tower Creatures (those listed under Tower on the Masterchart: Centaurs, Gargoyles, and Ogres). Three Creatures and one Lord must be placed in each Legion. These initial assignments of characters are confidential, and should not be revealed to the other players.  These beginning Legions may not be split until the player's second Game-Turn.  



## 6.0 GAME-TURNS
TITAN is played in a series of turns called Game-Turns, beginning with the first player and proceeding clockwise around the table until the game ends. The player who is taking his turn is known as the Mover. Each Game-Turn consists of four phases: Commencement, Movement, Engagement, and Enlistment. The different activities of these phases are meant to take place in their prescribed order, and all the activity of a particular phase should be completed before proceeding to the next phase.  Players who forget to do something should not be allowed to do it out of sequence later, except in the instance of an unresolved Engagement which should be resolved as soon as it is discovered as overdue. Activity that takes place out of order is invalid, but if another Game-Turn has begun since it occurred, the activity should be allowed to stand.  

6.1 During the Commencement Phase, the Mover may split new Legions from his existing Legions; this is the only method of bringing more Legions onto the Masterboard. To speed play, players should plan and arrange their splits ahead of time so that they can immediately begin to move when the player moving before them finishes.  

6.2 At the start of his Movement Phase, the Mover rolls a single die for his Movement Roll, once this roll is made he may create no more new Legions this Came-Turn. During the Movement Phase, he must move at least one of his Legions. A moving Legion must move as many Lands as the number rolled on the die, or until it enters a Land occupied by an opposing Legion, whichever comes first. He may move all or only some of his Legions, but must move at least one. Only the Mover's Legions may be moved at this time, and only the Mover may move them.  The details of moving Legions are explained in section 7.0.


6.3 During the Engagement Phase, every Engagement initiated by the Mover during the preceding Movement Phase must be resolved by the complete elimination of at least one of the two engaged Legions. If more than one Engagement has occurred, the Mover determines the order of their consideration and resolution. Each Engagement should be considered separately by the two involved players and must be fully, resolved before considering the next. The details of resolving Engagements are explained in section 9.0.  

6.4 During the Enlistment Phase each of the Mover's Legions that was moved in the Movement Phase and survived the Engagement Phase may muster a new character. The mechanics of mustering are explained in section 18.0. Again, in the interest of speeding play, the players can deviate here slightly from the normal sequence of a Game-Turn. Players can check each Legion as they finish moving it to see if it can muster a new character, instead of waiting until they have moved them all and resolved any Engagements. Note, however, that Legions defending in Engagements have first call on any characters that may be running low in the caretakers stacks; thus, characters recruited by the Mover may have to be turned over to the defending Legion. Also, a moving Legion which normally could not muster because it is seven high, may have an Angel summoned out of the Legion during the Engagement Phase, thereby allowing it to muster (see 15.0, Summoning Angels).  

6.5 When a player's Game-Turn ends, he should announce this fact so that the next player knows to begin his turn, A player's Game-Turn begins when he splits his first Legion for that turn or makes his Movement Roll, whichever occurs first.  



## 7.0 MOVING LEGIONS
Each Legion must be moved individually and completely before another Legion is moved. No Legion may be moved more than once per Movement Phase. A Legion must be moved in its entirety; its characters cannot be dropped off or moved separately on the Masterboard. Only the Mover's Legions may be moved, and the Mover decides in what order they will move, As each Legion is moved its marker should be flipped over or rotated to indicate that this Legion is finished moving. During the Enlistment Phase, the Mover can flip the marker back upright as he determines whether or not that Legion will muster a Creature.  

7.1 A Legion may be moved through a Land occupied by another of the Mover's Legions, but may not end its move on such a Land. Each Legion moved must travel the full count of the Movement Roll, unless another player's Legion is encountered in the moving Legion's path, in which case its move ends there and those two Legions are locked in an Engagement.  No further movement is allowed into or across the Land of an Engagement during that turn (except Teleportation, see section 8.0). A Legion whose move would end on a Land occupied by another of the Mover's Legions may not make that move, unless the second Legion is also capable of moving and moves beforehand. The Mover is not forced to move a Legion just to allow another Legion to move (this may give the Mover the option of aborting the split of a new Legion by occupying the only Land the new Legion could move to).  

7.2 All moves must follow the Signs from Land to adjacent Land according to the count of the Movement Roll, except when the Movement Roll is a 6 and a Legion is eligible for teleportation (see section 8.0).  

7.3 The Signs are of four types: Blocks, Arches, Arrows, and Triple Arrows. The top of each Sign touches the Land toward which it points. The single-symbol Signs (Blocks, Arches, and Arrows) exist only in pairs pointing in opposite directions. The Signs are explained on the following Movement Chart.  

7.4 MOVEMENT CHART
EFFECTS ON MOVEMENT
BLOCK
A Legion where last move ended on a Land from which a Block points must begin its next move in that direction.

ARCH
A Legion whose last move ended on a Land from which an Arch points may begin its next move in that direction.

ARROW
a. A Legion standing on a Tower Land may begin its next move in the direction of any of that Tower's Arrows.
b. A Legion that moves into a Land from which single Arrows point may continue its move in one of those directions, but it may not backtrack,

TRIPLE ARROW
a. A Legion whose last move ended on a Land from which a Triple Arrow points may begin its next move in that direction unless the Land also contains a Block.
b. A Legion that moves into a Land from which a Triple Arrow points must move in that direction if it continues moving.


7.5 Note that Blocks and Arches apply only to a Legion's initial direction of movement (the first Land it moves to from its starting point); they have no effect upon Legions passing through Lands which contain either of these Signs. Arrows and Triple Arrows may guide initial directions and thereafter regulate the execution of movement.  

7.6 First Move Mulligan: Because the first turn Movement Roll can be crucial, each player is allowed a second roll if not satisfied with the first. The second roll is then binding. A player may do this only on his very first Game-Turn, and if he chooses not to, he doesn't have the option of doing it later.  



## 8.0 TELEPORTATION
Teleportation is a special type of movement requiring the presence of Lords, which allows the moving forces to disregard the normal movement rules. There are three types of Teleportation: Tower Teleportation, Titan Teleportation, and the Summoning of Angels. (See section 15.0 for the mechanics of Summoning Angels.) Tower and Titan Teleportations take place on the Masterboard during the Movement Phase and involve the movement of Legions. Only one Legion can be teleported per Movement Phase, and only one Angel can be summoned per Engagement Phase.  

8.1 A Legion containing one or more Lords that begins its move in a Tower Land may perform a Tower Teleportation only when the Movement Roll is a 6. From that Tower Land it may be teleported to a vacant Tower Land anywhere on the Masterboard, or to any variant Land up to six Lands distant from the Tower Land it began in. The teleporting Legion moves along the Lands, ignoring all Signs and enemy Legions (engaged or not). The Mover must reveal to all other players the identity of the Lord in the Legions that allows such a move.

8.2 Once a player has attained a score of 400+ points (and his Titan has a Power-factor of 10 or better), he may perform Titan Teleportation with his Titan Legion (the Legion containing his Titan).  On a Movement Roll of 6 the Titan Legion may teleport from whatever Land it occupies to any Land (regardless of distance) that contains another player's Legion and engage it in Battle. A Legion moved by Titan Teleportation may not stop on a vacant Land; it must initiate an Engagement. The Mover must show that the Legion contains his Titan.

8.3 Teleportations are optional, and Legions able to teleport have the option of moving normally or not moving at all if not required to do so.




## 9.0 ENGAGEMENTS
An Engagement occurs when a moving Legion enters a Land already occupied by another player's Legion. The Engagement involves only the players owning the two Legions, the characters which these Legions now contain, and the characters which may be added during Battle (see sections 14.0 and 15.0, Reinforcements and Summoning Angels). The Mover is considered the attacker, and the other player is the defender. An Engagement ends when at least one of the engaged Legions is completely eliminated by fleeing, concession, agreement, or by Battle. Engagements are resolved one at a time, at the Mover's choice.  

9.1 The Mover first selects the order in which Engagements are to be resolved. For each Engagement the two involved players first consider their options by secretly examining the characters in the opposing Legion. The characters in the two opposing Legions are kept secret until they are either voluntarily slain as part of an agreement or concession and turned over to the caretaker, or the Engagement is resolved by Battle which must be conducted in view of the other players. After this examination the players determine how they will resolve the Engagement.


9.2 The defender may immediately opt to flee. If the defender flees, his characters are automatically and completely eliminated, and the attacker wins with no losses. The attacker receives only half the total value of the eliminated characters (rounding down) added to his score when the defender flees (see section 16.0, Scoring Battles).  The attacker cannot flee, and a defending Legion containing a Lord cannot flee. If the defender suggests an agreement or accepts Battle, he may not then flee.  

9.3 A negotiated agreement to resolve an Engagement must be mutually agreed to by both of the engaged players, and must include the elimination of at least one of the engaged Legions. An agreement can include losses to the winning Legion (and even mutual elimination), but it cannot involve characters not present in either Legion. Agreements may involve promises of later movements or actions by the players, but only that part of the agreement involving the elimination of present characters is binding. Agreements cannot involve the awarding of more or less points than the value of all of the characters to the Legion that is eliminated. If the agreement is for a mutual elimination, no points are awarded. Except when the defender flees, either player may demand that the Battle be played out. This makes battle the basis of any negotiated agreement.  

9.4 Once the defender declines the option to flee and cannot conclude an agreement, either player has the option at anytime of conceding the Engagement. Only one player can concede, thereby ending the Engagement. The conceding player's Legion is completely eliminated, and the victor's Legion suffers no further loses. The winner of an Engagement by concession receives full value for the loser's characters. A player can concede with any Legion, including his Titan Legion (which eliminates him from the game). Concessions are generally made to speed play, to deny the defender a reinforcement (see 14.2), or to avoid slaying a weak character in a seven high attacking Legion which could be replaced after the Battle by acquiring an Angel or mustering (see 17,0 and 18.0).  

9.5 When an Engagement is decided by the elimination of at least one of the engaged Legions, the point values of the losing Legion’s characters are added to the score of the winning player. If the winner receives enough points, he may be able to add an Angel to the victorious Legion (see section 17.0 Acquiring Angels). Creatures eliminated from either Legion are permanently lost; the, are not returned to the caretaker's stacks, nor used again this game (Lords and Demi-Lords are returned to the caretaker and can be reused). The marker of a Legion that is eliminated is removed from the Masterboard and returned to its owner, who may reuse it. The surviving characters of a winning Legion are returned to the Land on the Masterboard where the Engagement took place, beneath their Legion Marker.  



## 10.0 BATTLE
Battle is the tactical area of the game. It is fought on the Battleland corresponding to the terrain of the Land where the Engagement has occurred, Battle is resolved in consecutive turns called Battle Rounds, during which each player conducts a Maneuver Phase, followed by a mutual Strike Phase. During a player's Maneuver Phase he moves the characters of his engaged Legion on the Battleland to best position them for combat (see section 11.0, Maneuver Phase). After every Maneuver Phase follows a Strike Phase during which both players simultaneously strike the other's characters (sec sections 12.0 and 13.0, Strike Phases and Rangestriking). The player whose Maneuver Phase preceded the Strike Phase strikes with his characters first. Battle ends when all of the characters of one (or both) of the engaged Legions is eliminated, or after seven Battle-Rounds, whichever occurs first.  

10.1 Each Battleland is marked with the name of its terrain, this name-side corresponds to the numbered side of the Land of the Engagement on the Masterboard. The characters of the attacking Legion enter the Battleland on the same relative side (which will be four hexes wide) as their Legion entered the Land when moving on the Masterboard. The defending Legion's characters enter the three hex wide side opposite that assigned the attacker (exceptions see 10.2 and 10.3). The attacker's forces will always enter along a wide side, and the defender will enter from a narrow side. Distinction between the opposing forces is based upon the counters' facings; each player should have the bottom of his counters nearest his entry side. Characters from either Legion that do not enter onto the Battleland during each player's first Maneuver Phase are considered eliminated and may not be brought on later. Characters eliminated in this manner count toward the victor's score (see 16.0, Scoring Battles).

10.2 When the Tower Battleland is used, the attacker's entry side is always the lower left side opposite the name-side. The defender's forces must be deployed within the walled area in lieu of the defender's first Maneuver Phase; note that such characters do not enter from the name-side, they are deployed directly into the walled area and may not move in the defender's first Maneuver Phase. The name-side is considered the defender's entry side for purposes of reinforcement.  

10.3 The defender always takes his Maneuver Phase first each Battle-Round.

10.4 When the attacker uses Titan Teleportation (see section 8.2) to cause an Engagement, he may enter from the four hex wide side of his choice (except when attacking in a Tower Land, see 10.2).  

10.5 A Turn Record Track is provided at the bottom of every Battleland.  The defender places the matter of his Legion on the first turn box prior to his first Maneuver Phase, and before each of his subsequent Maneuver Phases he should advance the marker one box (the Legion Marker of the attacking Legion remains on the Masterboard to mark the location of the Engagement). If the Battle has not ended before the defender's eighth Maneuver Phase, the remaining characters of the attacker's Legion are eliminated, and whatever is left of the defender's Legion is returned to the Masterboard. This is referred to as a time-loss, and the defender receives no points for the victory.  

10.6 During a Strike Phase, each player must strike with each of his characters in contact with an opposing character (see section 12.0). The player whose Maneuver Phase preceded the Strike Phase strikes first, and then the other player responds. Strikes are considered to be simultaneous, and slain characters are not removed until they have conducted any allowable strikes.  



## 11.0 MANEUVER PHASE
During a Maneuver Phase, the moving player may move the characters of his engaged Legion on the Battleland. Only the phasing player's characters may be moved, and he may not move any of his opponent's characters. He may move as few or as many of his characters as he wishes. Characters are moved one at a time, and the movement of a character must be completed before the next one is moved. A character cannot be moved more than once per Maneuver Phase.  

11.1 When entering the Battleland during the player's first Maneuver Phase, the first hex a character moves into must lie along the correct side of entry (see 10.1). This hex counts against the character's maximum allowable movement for that phase. Characters cannot be moved off the Battleland.  

11.2 During a Maneuver Phase a character may be moved a maximum number of hexes on the Battleland equal to, or less than, that character's Skill-factor. Movement may be restricted due to the presence of other friendly characters, enemy characters, and hazards within hexes and along hexsides.

11.3 Any two opposing characters occupying a adjacent hexes at the start of any Maneuver Phase are considered to be locked in contact with each other (exception: see Cliffs on the Hazards Chart, 11. 7). A character that begins its Maneuver Phase in contact with one or more enemy characters cannot move. A character moving through a hex or hexes adjacent to enemy characters is not in contact with them and need not end its move in such hexes.  

11.4 Certain hazards along a hexside or inside a hex may slow characters attempting to enter those hexes (see the Hazards Chart, 11.7). When crossing or entering such a hazard, the hex moved into counts as two hexes entered. If a character does not have the movement allowance left to move two hexes, it cannot enter or cross the hazard. A flying character ignores all hazards (except Volcanos, which only Dragons may enter or cross) until it lands. If a flying character is slowed by a hazard to a hex in which it chooses to land, landing in that hex counts as moving two hexes. Hazards have no effect on the movement of characters leaving a hex (exception: see Cliffs, 11.7).  

11.5 A non-flying character cannot enter a hex that contain another character (even one that is friendly). A flying character may be moved across occupied hexes. A flying character always lands at the end of its move, but may not land on a hazard that forbids its entry, in an occupied hex, or in a hex which it does not have a sufficient movement allowance to enter.  

11.6 Characters may not straddle hexes, nor may unspent move. be carried over to the next Maneuver Phase.

11.7 HAZARDS CHART (see Rulebook inside rear cover or separate sheet)12.0 STRIKE PHASES During a Strike Phase both players attack with all of their characters that began the phase on the Battleland in contact with one or more enemy characters. The player whose Maneuver Phase immediately preceded the Strike Phase resolves the strikes of all of his characters first, and only his characters may employ Rangestriking (see 13.0, Rangestriking).  Characters slain during a Strike Phase are not removed from play until the end of that phase, after they have had a chance to strike. Every character that can strike must do so, unless all adjacent enemy characters are already slain. To strike, a character rolls a number of dice equal to its Power-factor. The Skill-factors of the striking and target characters are cross-referenced on the Strike Chart (12.7) to determine the Strike-number (minimum number needed on each die to hit). Each die roll equal to or greater than the Strike-number is a hit. When a character accumulates hits equal to or greater than its Power-factor, it is slain.  

12.1 The player who just completed his Maneuver Phase attacks with his characters first, deciding the order in which they will strike and at which enemy characters. Each character strikes once per Strike-phase. It strikes individually and must complete its attack before the next character strikes. Players may not strike their own characters. When the first player is finished, the opposing player conducts his attacks.  

12.2 For each character that strikes, the owning player must first specify which enemy character he will strike, and then determine the Strike-number needed to hit. The Strike-number is found by cross-referencing the Skill-factors of the attacking and target character on the Strike Chart, which will reveal a number result For example, an Ogre (Skill-factor of 2) is striking a Lion (Skill-factor of 3). Cross-referencing the Ogre's factor of 2 with the Lion's factor of 3 gives the Strike-number of 5, which is the minimum number needed on the dice of the strike to score points of damage on the Lion. When the Ogre rolls its strike of six dice (Ogre Power-factor of 6), all results of 5 or 6 will be hits and results of 1-4 will be misses. The Lion is slain and removed from the game at the end of any Strike Phase in which it reaches the 5 hit limit of its Power-factor. Hazards in either the attacker's or target's hex, or on the hexside between them, may affect the Strike-number and the number of dice the attacker rolls (see the Hazards Chart 11.7).  

12.3 Damage that characters take during Battle should be noted with the hit chits provided. Damage accumulates and cannot be repaired during Battle. Damage has no effect on the wounded character's ability to move or strike, even if it has only one hit remaining. Characters that are damaged (but not slain) are automatically healed when the Battle ends.  Slain characters are eliminated and cannot be healed.  

12.4 If a strike scores more points of damage than are needed to slay the target character, the extra points may be carried over to another enemy character (which must also be adjacent to the attacker) provided that the attacker would not have normally needed a higher Strike-number to hit the second character. No damage can be carried over to a character which would require a higher Strike-number to hit, to hit the second second character. No damage can be carried over to a character which would require a higher Strike-number to hit, regardless of whether the numbers on the dice would have been high enough to score damage at that higher Strike-number. For example, an Ogre has the option of striking at either a Lion which already has accumulated three hits or a Centaur which is undamaged. The Strike-numbers for his two potential targets are 5 for the Lion and 6 for the Centaur. He elects to strike the Lion, needing to roll 5s to hit. Regardless of how many 6s he rolls, the best he can do is give the Lion two more hits and slay it. He cannot cause any damage to the Centaur. A player may, however, choose to strike at the first character using a Strike-number higher than normally necessary so that any extra points of damage can be carried over to the second larger. This option must be announced prior to rolling any dice, clearly stating the first target and the optional Strike-number for this strike. You need not declare where extra hits will carry to. In the above example, the Ogre could decide to count only 6s rolled as hits, and thus if he rolls more than two 6s, the Centaur will be damaged by these additional hits. However, now 5s will nor hit the Lion. Carrying over points of damage is optional; the striking player decides whether or not to do so if he can.  

12.5 Characters may increase their power or skill when striking down across various hazard hexsides (see the Hazards Chart 11.7). Characters employing these benefits may not carry over damage to characters against which the attacker's benefits would not normally have applied. Players wishing to carry over damage, may forego any benefits to their attacks which the hazard allowed.  

12.6 Characters are removed from the Battleland at the end of the Strike Phase in which they are slain. Each player's slain characters should be stacked off the Battleland near the edge which they entered to facilitate scoring at the end of the Battle. Slain Lords and Demi-Lords, are not returned to the caretaker's stacks until after an Engagement is resolved.  Thus, they are not available to be acquired for points or recruited as a reinforcement, respectively, during an Engagement in which they are slain.  

12.7 STRIKE CHART (see back of Rulebook)



## 13.0 RANGESTRIKING
During a Strike Phase, the player who just completed the previous Maneuver Phase is entitled to employ rangestriking; the opposing player may not employ rangestriking this Strike Phase. A rangestrike is a special strike representing thrown weapons, spells, breathing fire, etc., which is directed against one specific, nonadjacent enemy character (no carry over to another target is ever allowed). Only characters with the lightning bolt symbol between their Battle-factors have the ability to rangestrike. The number of dice thrown in a rangestrike is less than a normal adjacent strike, but the target may not strike back, since it is not adjacent. Rangestrikes cannot be made by characters locked in contact with enemy characters.

13.1 The number of dice thrown in a rangestrike is determined by the character's Range-strength, which is equal to one half the character's Power-factor, rounded down. For example, a Dragon with a Power.faclor of 9 would have a Range-strength of 4, and would throw four dice when resolving a rangestrike.  

13.2 Rangestrikes may be conducted up to a range of hexes equal to the character's Skill-factor, counting the rangestriker's hex, the target's hex, and each intervening hex. Rangstrikes traveling a distance of three hexes strike with the character's normal Skillfactor. Rangestrikes at a range of four hexes reduce the attacker's Skill-factor by 1. For example, a Minotaur with a Skill-factor of 4 rangestrikes at a range of four hexes.  Because of the long range, the Minotaur's Skill-factor is assumed to be 3 (instead of 4) when calculating the Strike-number for the rangestrike.  Rangestrikes may not be conducted at a range greater than four hexes 

13.3 A rangestrike must trace the most direct path possible from the rangestriker's hex to the target's hex. The players should imagine a line drawn from the center of the rangestriker's hex to the center of the target's hex. The hexes through which this imaginary line passes are the path of the rangestrike. When this path passes lengthwise along a hexside, it is considered to be passing through one of the two hexes the hexside separates. The rangestriking player decides which hex is part of the path. If any of the intervening hexes are blocked, the rangestrike is not allowed (exception: see 13.5). Rangestrikes are blocked by certain Hazards (see the Hazards Chart 11.7), and friendly and enemy characters in the paths (exception: see 13.5).  

RANGESTRIKE DIAGRAM

The above diagram shows the possible paths that rangestrikes must take.  These paths are exemplary. When not blocked, a rangestrike can be targeted to any hex within range by one of the examples above. The arrows approximate trajectories: the dotted lines show clearly the hexes crossed by such trajectories. The numbers count the rangestrikes' distance. Note that there are two paths to hex E. If either of these is blocked, the rangestrike must pass through the other to reach E. If both are blocked, the rangestrike is not allowed.  

13.4 Rangestriking and normal striking can be employed by a player's characters in any order. All rangestrlkes do not have to be conducted at the same time. They can be conducted first, interspersed with normal strikes, or saved until all normal strikes have been conducted.

13.5 Lords (Titans, Angels, and Archangels) are immune to rangestrikes from any character except the Warlock. The rangeslrike of a Warlock is never blocked or affected by the presence of hazards or characters.  Warlocks may rangestrike four hexes with no reduction in their Skill-factor. However, a Warlock's movement and conventional strikes are subject to the normal effects of the presence of hazards and characters. Warlocks cannot rangestrike when in contact with an opposing character.  



## 14.0 REINFORCEMENTS
During Battle, the defender may add a reinforcement to his Legion by mustering a character at the beginning of his fourth Maneuver Phase. To add a reinforcement, the defending Legion must be qualified to muster a Creature or Demi-Lord from the Land of the Engagement (see 18.0 Mustering Characters). The reinforcement must move onto the Battleland during that player's fourth Maneuver Phase or it cannot be taken during the Battle. If the defender wins before his fourth Maneuver Phase, he may still muster a character after the Battle if qualified. If the defender wins after the fourth Maneuver Phase and has not taken a reinforcement (because either the Legion contained 7 characters at the beginning of the fourth Maneuver Phase or the reinforcement was unable to move onto the Battleland at that time), he may now do so. Reinforcements enter the Battleland from the defender's side of entry, just as the defender's original characters did during his first Maneuver Phase. Reinforcements which join a Legion after a victorious Battle are placed with the survivors on the Masterboard under the Legion Marker.  

14.1 A Legion may not muster a reinforcement if it presently contains seven characters (do not count those already slain). No Legion may receive more than one reinforcement per Battle. Only the defender may receive a reinforcement, but he is not required to do so 

14.2 If the defender wins the Engagement by an agreement or by the attacker conceding after committing characters to the Battleland, the defender is still entitled to a reinforcement, so long as he is qualified to do so. If the attacker concedes before placing any of his characters on the Battleland, the defender may not muster a reinforcement.  



## 15.0 SUMMONING ANGELS
Summoning is a type of teleportation where an Angel (or Archangel) is removed from a friendly Legion somewhere on the Masterboard and added to another Legion which is either currently engaged in a Battle or which has just won a Battle. The attacker must summon the Angel into a Battle during his first Maneuver Phase following the first Strike Phase in which one or more of the defender's characters are slain. To summon an Angel, the attacker must have an Angel available in another of his Legions that is not currently involved with an opposing Legion in an unresolved Engagement (an Angel that has already fought in another Legion in a victorious Battle this Engagement Phase may be summoned, and any damage previously taken is healed before the summoning). An Angel just acquired due to a previous Battle in this Engagement Phase may be summoned. A Legion cannot summon an Angel if it presently contains seven characters (do not count those already slain). Only one Angel can be summoned by a player during his entire Engagement Phase. Only the attacker may summon Angels, but he is not required to do so.  

15.1 A summoned Angel is removed from its original Legion and teleports to the Land of the Engagement, entering the Battleland from the attacker's side of entry. The summoned Angel will remain with the Legion into which it was teleported (unless summoned elsewhere during a later Game-Turn), should it survive the Battle.  

15.2 If the attacker wins an Engagement by agreement or by the defender conceding, he may immediately summon an Angel, so long as he has one available and has not summoned one already uring the current Engagement Phase. If the defender flees, the attacker may not summon an Angel.  

15.3 While a Battle is being resolved, the attacker only has the option of summoning an Angel once, and that is during his first Maneuver Phase following the slaying of one or more opposing characters. If the attacker passes up his option to summon, or if he is unable to summon because his Legion presently contains seven characters, the option is lost during that Battle. If the attacker goes on to win, however he may then summon an Angel after the Battle, within the restrictions mentioned above. 




## 16.0 SCORING BATTLES
Battle ends when at least one of the engaged Legions is completely eliminated by combat or concession. But the Engagement is not fully resolved until the winning player has added any character which he is allowed and which was not taken during the Battle (see sections 14.O and 15.0), and until the Battle has been scored. Battles are scored by totaling the value of the characters in the losing Legion and adding this total to the winner's score. The value of a character is the product of its Battle-factors, Power-factor times the Skill-factor. For example, a Lion (Power-factor 5, Skill-factor 3) has a value of 15 (5 x 3 = 15). The scorekeeper keeps a running total of each player's score. Players may not refuse points which they are due.  

16.1 Characters lost by the winning Legion are ignored for scoring purposes. Any Engagement that results in mutual elimination scores nothing for either player (exception: see 19.3). Engagements won by concession or agreement score full points to the winner. An Engagement won because the defender chase to flee scores only half the fleeing Legions total value (round down any fractions).  

16.2 The scorekeeper must keep a separate total score column for each player end must add the value of each Engagement as it is won. A player's cumulative total score will influence the acquisition, of Angels (see 17.0) and the Power-factor of the player's Titan (see 19.1).




## 17.0 ACQUIRING ANGELS
Each time a player's score attains any multiple of 100 points due to adding the value earned in a victorious Engagement, the player may add an Angel to the Legion that won that Engagement. Such an Angel must be added immediately, and only to the winning Legion, or it cannot be taken.  

17.1 A Legion may not add an Angel if it presently contains seven characters or if there are no Angels available in the caretaker's stacks. The color of Angels have no bearing on play, cravat Angel of any color may be taken when eligible. Added Angels are placed directly into their Legion's stack and are also immediately available to be summoned to another Battle (see 15.0).


17.2 If adding the value of an Engagement to a player's score raises the score beyond more than one multiple of 100, the player may add one Angel for each extra multiple of 100 attained, provided they are available and that the winning Legion can fit them in.  

17.3 Archangel, are Lords acquired when a player's score attains a multiple of 500. An Archangel is acquired instead of an Angel, not in addition to it.  If no Archangel is available from the caretaker's stacks, the player may take an Angel. The mechanics of acquiring an Archangel are the same as for Angels. Like Angels, Archangels may be summoned into Battle (see 15.0), are returned to the caretaker's stacks when slain, and may perform Tower Teleportation (see 8.1)

17.4 The addition of an Angel to a victorious and otherwise eligible Legion is optional. For example, a player with a Legion containing six characters may have the choice of taking an Angel which he is due for having just won a Battle end scoring enough points, or of mustering an important Creature for which he is eligible and qualified. The player has the option of taking the Angel, or taking the Creature, or of taking neither 



## 18.0 MUSTERING
Mustering is the voluntary process by which a Legion, which ends its move in a new Land, adds new Creatures and Demi-Lords, and is the main way by which the players increase the quantity and quality of their forces. To muster, a Legion must be both eligible and qualified to do so.  The types of Creatures and Demi-Lords that can possibly be mustered to the various terrains are listed on the Mastercharts placed in the corners of the Masterboard. When a player wishes to muster a character into an eligible Legion, he must reveal to the other players the character(s) that qualifies the Legion to do so. The caretaker then gives the player the newly mustered character from his stacks and the player places it under his Legion Marker. No Legion may ever muster more than one character per Game-Turn.  

18.1 A Legion is only eligible to muster after moving in a Movement Phase (and surviving any ensuing Engagement) or when defending in Battle (see 14.0 Reinforcements). Legions which don't move, are not defending in Battle, or presently contain seven characters cannot muster.  

18.2 Creatures are listed on the Mastercharts beneath the terrains where they are found. They are listed according to their values, with the lesser Creatures listed first. The numbers in parentheses are the Creatures' Battle-factors. The numbers to left of the characters name indicate how many of that type a Legion must already contain to be qualified to muster a Creature of the next larger size.

18.3 A Legion is qualified to muster a Creature if it contains any Creature listed on the Masterchart beneath the terrain on which it stands. A Creature may muster a like Creature or any lesser Creature of that terrain.  Several Creatures of the same type may muster the next highest Creature.  Intermediate steps in the progression on the Masterchart cannot be skipped. For example, a Legion containing an Ogre could muster an Ogre from a Marsh Land; if it contained a Troll it could take either a Troll or an Ogre. A Legion in the Marsh could reveal two Ogres to muster a Troll.  A Legion in the Mountains could reveal two Lions to muster a Minotaur, however, Lions are not sufficient to muster a Dragon; the Legion must contain two Minotaurs, a Dragon, or a Colossus to be qualified to muster another Dragon. (A Colossus in a Legion in the Mountains would qualify it to muster a Colossus, Dragon, Minotaur, or Lion.) A Legion does not have to muster, and does not have to take the highest Creature for which it qualifies. No Legion can muster a Creature not listed beneath the terrain in which that Legion stands.

18.4 A Legion that can muster a character in more than one way can muster that character in either way (the player only has to show any character(s) that is sufficient to qualify, not all the characters). For example, a Legion with two Ogres and one Troll can muster a Troll by showing either both Ogres or one Troll.  

18.5 Tower Lands are unique for mustering purposes. Any eligible Legion on a Tower Land may muster any one of the three Tower Creatures (Centaurs, Gargoyles, and Ogres), regardless of what Creatures it currently contains. Or, eligible Legions in Tower Lands may be qualified to muster one of the two types of Demi-Lords: Warlocks and Guardians. A Legion is qualified to muster a Warlock if it contains the player's Titan (which must be revealed as usual), or if it presently contains a Warlock. A Legion containing any three identical Creatures (three Trolls for example) is qualified to muster a Guardian. A Legion containing a Guardian can muster another Guardian 



## 19.0 TITANS
Each player has one Titan piece in play which represents the game player personally. When a Titan is slain, the owning player is out of the game.  The continued presence of each player's Titan piece on the Masterboard enables those players to move Legions, muster Creatures, fight Battles, and remain in Masterplay. As a player wins Battles, the Power of his Titan piece will increase, and it will eventually gain the capability of Titan Teleportation if it survives. Once lost, Titans cannot be replaced nor additional ones gained.

19.1 For each 100 points that a player scores, his Titan increases its Power-factor by 1. All Titans begin the game with a Power-factor of 6. To calculate its current Power-factor, determine the number of times that 100 can be divided into the player's score, rounding down, and add this number to 6. For example, a player with a score of 327 would have a Titan with a Power-factor of 9; a player with a score of 1,163 would have a Titan with a Power-factor of 17.  

19.2 When a Titan reaches a Power-factor of 10 (by the owning player scoring 400+ points), it gains the capability of Titan Tele potation (see 8.2).

19.3 If a player's Titan is slain in Battle, it waits until the end of the Strike Phase to be eliminated, just like other characters. When it is eliminated, so is the player and the Battle immediately ends. Following the end of the Strike Phase in which the Titan was slain, add up the value of the Titan and all of the other characters in the Titan's Legion which had also been slain up to that point. Any characters from the Titan's Legion which were still alive after the Titan was eliminated, are momentarily set aside and do not count toward the score of this Battle. If the player who slew the Titan still has characters remaining in the Battle, the value of the Titan and its supporting characters also slain are added to his score. Any Angels due to the victor because of the addition of these points may be taken now. If the Legion which slew the Titan was also eliminated, the slaying player does not get the points from the Battle.  

19.4 After scoring the Battle in which the Titan was slain, remove all of the eliminated player's Legions currently on the Masterboard (including any remnants of the Titan Legion still engaged) and any that would have been involved in other Engagements this turn. These Legions are immediately eliminated, scoring half points to the player with whom they were engaged, or to the player who slew the Titan if the Legion is not engaged. Points scored in this manner add to the respective Titan's Power-factor, but will not add Angels (and the winning Legions may not recruit reinforcements), regardless of the multiples of 100 points attained. (Player's will have only one running score, and only under the special circumstances detailed above will multiples of 100 not add Angels.) The player who eliminated the Titan is passed the loser's Legion Markers, which he may now use in addition to his own.



## 20.0 GAME ETIQUETTE

20.1 All play is expected to be honest and should be friendly, even if it gets serious. The caretaker should be particularly careful to keep his Legions separate from the stacks of characters he must pass out, and he should keep these stacks neat. Any player is allowed to count any of the caretaker's stacks, except during his own Game-Turn, which would slow play. The caretaker should make sure that every character he hands out is properly due the Legion to which it is given.  

20.2 The scorekeeper should maintain legible, accurate records, which must be kept openly so that at any time a player may see every player's score. The scorekeeper should announce the fact when a player's score has attained a multiple of 100 points. When a Battle is resolved, the caretaker should announce which Creatures have been slain.

20.3 A die that rolls off the table, lands more than slightly cocked, or goes into a glass, ash tray, etc., should be rerolled. If a player mistakenly rolls more dice than he was due, he must reroll with the correct number. The second roll in this case may only count hits equal to or less than those achieved by the first roll, all additional hits being ignored.

20.4 A player cannot concede the game except during his own Game-Turn, or while his Titan's Legion is involved in an Engagement. If he concedes on his own Game-Turn, all of his Legions are eliminated: his characters are set aside with the slain, and no player receives any points for such a concession. If he concedes while his Titan's Legion is engaged (even during his own Game-Turn) his Titan is considered as slain in Battle and scored accordingly (see 19.3).A player who must quit the game should concede rather than commit suicide on another player's Legion, although that remains his option. Alternatively, a quitting player might enter into an Engagement with a weak player and then concede in order to help balance the continuing game.

20.5 In the event that players must stop the game before it is decided, a victor can be determined by adding each player's score to the total value of all of his remaining Legions. Each Legion should be revealed as it is counted. The player with the highest grand total is the winner. If instead, the game is to be postponed, each player ,should reveal each of his Legions to the scorekeeper, who should record its contents and the number of the Land which it occupies.



## 21.0 SHORTENED VERSIONS OF TITAN
A game of TITAN can become a long affair, depending on the number of players involved and their relative skill and experience, Players constrained by time may wish to modify the game slightly to speed its conclusion. Examples of modifications which can be employed to shorten the game are included in the following cases

21.1 The simplest way to shorten the game is to put a time limit on it.  Before starting, a time limit is set at which play will cease, when the time limit is reached, the player's total both their current score and the value of all of their Legions on the Masterboard, and the highest total wins.

21.2 Players may choose to limit the time available to move and maneuver during Masterplay and Battle. For example, each player could be limited to three minutes to complete a Movement Phase on the Masterboard. Players who fail to move one of (their Legions within the three minute limit for Maslerplay, must randomly determine which one of their Legions will move. In Battle, a player is limited to one minute to move his characters during his Maneuver Phase (allow two minutes for each player's first phase); any characters not brought on the Battleland within this limit are eliminated. These constraints handicap players with a large number of Legions in play, and those who are inexperienced and unskilled, They also train players to think ahead.  

21.3 A more drastic option to shorten the game is called TITANplus. For this version Centaurs, Gargoyles, and Ogres are not used. Each player begins wish two Cyclops, two Lions, and Two Trolls instead, and these three Creature types are now considered Tower Creatures. In addition, players may use only eight Legion Markers (instead of twelve) unless they eliminate another Titan, there by gaining the use of his eight markers.  TITANplus eliminates much of the interesting strategy of the early game, but retains the climactic struggles with the more powerful Creatures of the end game.

DESIGNER'S NOTES
Our original conception of developing a fantasy wargame occurred in 1970. We drew up a floor length board which depicted a popular world of adventure and peopled it with its indigenous races as well as a few of our own. All movement was made on the map, and the game developed frontally out from the citadels and cavern fortresses which generated new forces. The fronts did not consume as quickly as they were fed, and the game tended to bog down as second and third lines of reserves solidified the fronts.

During the early 1970's we worked with and playtested a system set on a symmetrical world of our own concoction. Movement remained confined to a single board, and the conflict kept up fronts, although these were more fluid than before. It was still too difficult to approach those enemy strongholds from which their troops sprang, and the games were endless.

In 1976 we added terrain specific tactical displays and placed the overgame on a hexagonal web of the various terrains. We made the production of forces dependent on movement rather than the retention of strong points. TITAN was born. It was a more playable, more enjoyable system, but play remained almost endless.

The later severities saw the refinement of the game. The size of the legions and the rate and manner of recruitment were adjusted to speed battles and control the length of the game. Master characters upon which each player depended were added to give the game a more direct objective than total attrition; these were called demigods at first, and titans began as their equivalent of angels.

In 1980 we published TITAN. Last minute alterations included setting the legions as stacks upon the masterboard (prior to then they were recorded on paper; pieces were drawn from a general pool to represent their characters in battles) and drawing up sets of markers to cap the stacks (earlier we had used figurines, macrame beads, painted blocks and knobs and a variety of other objects to mark the positions of our armies). We introduced the Reckoning to limit games to fewer hours. Lets not talk about the boxes, Battleboards or water soluable inks.

In 1981 we produced the Battlelands of TITAN supplement. We added demilords and new creatures to flesh out the recruitment chart and archangels to further inspire aggressive achievement. We brought-back the larger battle displays that we had fought on for most of TITAN'S time. Range fire was added to enhance the subtleties of combat maneuver. We eliminated the Reckoning because it tended to stifle games before they were fully developed.

Avalon Hill's production improves TITAN by adding the supplement to the basic game, deleting the Battleboards, re-editing the rules, and upgrading the quality of the components. Slight alterations have been made in the final tuning of the game, so if you have played TITAN before, read these rules carefully, for at the wrong moment, a slight difference can be telling.

Our initial impetus has been completed; we have made a fantasy wargame. Rather than represent any certain world or war, it is an abstract fantasy context that allows players to build their own armies and seek out their own battles. Across ten years the game has grown into an easily playable system with novel methods of movement, enlistment and combat complex enough to engage the interest of a serious strategist. I certainly hope you enjoy it.  

COMPONENTS
- One Masterboard (mounted game mapboard).
- One Law of TITAN (rulebook).
- Seven Counter Sheets (621 pieces).
- Six Battleland Cards.
- Four Six-Sided Dice.

REPLACEMENT PARTS
For a current replacement parts list, send a stamped, self addressed envelope to: The Avalon Hill Game Company, 451Harford Road, Baltimore, Maryland 21214. For an additional $1.00 we will send you one of our three full-color catalogues describing our many exciting games available both by mail and in discriminating retail outlets where better games are sold. Specify Strategy Games, Leisure Time Games, or Sports Games.  

RULES QUESTIONS
Questions on the play of this game will be gladly answered upon receipt, if they are accompanied by a stamped, self-addressed envelope. Questions on the actual design or the evolution of the game itself cannot be answered. This type of information is available only in the pages of our bi-monthly magazine, THE GENERAL. Sorry, but absolutely no game related questions can be answered by phone.  

TITAN DESIGN CREDITS
GAME DESIGN: Jason B. McAllister and David A. Trampier
GAME DEVELOPMENT: Jason B. McAllister, David A. Trampier, and Bruce C. Shelley
PLAYTESTERS: Barry McAllister, Brian McAllister, Craig Trampier, Alan R. Moon, Mick Uhl, Rex Martin, Richard Hamblen, Tom Murphy, Bill Rakowski, The University of Virginia Historical Simulation Society, and Dr. Vinny the Ninny.
COMPONENT ARTWORK: David A. Trampier
COMPONENT LAYOUT: David A. Trampier, Bruce C. Shelley, and Dale Sheaffer.
BOX ART: Kenn Nishiuye
TYPESETTING: Colonial Composition
PREP DEPT. COORDINATOR: Elaine M. Adkins
PRINTING: Monarch Services
PRODUCTION: Eastern Box 

HAZARD CHART (11.7)

CHARACTER
EFFECT ON MOVEMENT: A non-flying character may not enter a hex occupied by another character. A flying character may not end its move on a hex occupied by another character. A character in contact with an enemy character may not move.
EFFECT ON STRIKING: A character in contact with one or more enemy characters must strike at one of those characters.
EFFECT ON RANGESTRIKING: Rangestriking may not pass through a hex occupied by a character except under three conditions: (1) the rangestriker is a Warlock; (2) the character is at the base of a Cliff and the rangestriker or target is directly atop it; or (3) the character is at a lower elevation (see Plain hex below) than both the rangestriker and target. A character in contact with an enemy character may not rangestrike

PLAIN
EFFECT ON MOVEMENT: No effect.
EFFECT ON STRIKING: No effect.
EFFECT ON RANGESTRIKING: No Effect.
(Difference in shade serve to distinguish between different elevations, lighter shades being higher.)

TREE
EFFECT ON MOVEMENT: Entry forbidden to all non-flying characters. A flying character cannot end his move on a Tree hex.
EFFECT ON STRIKING: No effect.
EFFECT ON RANGESTRIKING: Rangestrikes may not pass through a Tree hex (exceptions: see 13.5).

BRAMBLE
NATIVE: Gargoyle, Cyclops, Gorgon, Behemoth, Serpent.
EFFECT ON MOVEMENT: A non-native character is slowed when entering a Bramble hex. (see 11.5).
EFFECT ON STRIKING: A native character defending in a Bramble hex has the Strike-number needed to hit it increased by 1 if attacked by a non-native character. A nonnative character striking out of a Bramble hex has its Skill-factor reduced by 1. 
EFFECT ON RANGESTRIKING: A native character defending in a Bramble hex has the Strike number needed to hit increased by 1 when it is the target of a rangestrike from a non-native character (exception: see 13.5). A non-native rangestriker loses a Skill-factor for each intervening hex that contains Bramble. Bramble in the rangestrike

BOG
NATIVE: Ogre. Troll. Ranger, Wyvern Hydra.
EFFECT ON MOVEMENT: Entry forbidden to nonflying non-native characters. A flying non-native character may not end his move on a Bog hex.
EFFECT ON STRIKING: No effect.
EFFECT ON RANGESTRIKING: No effect 

SAND
NATIVE: Lion, Griffon, Hydra.
EFFECT ON MOVEMENT: Entry slows non-flying non-native characters.
EFFECT ON STRIKING: No effect.
EFFECT ON RANGESTRIKING: No effect.

DUNE
NATIVE: Lion, Griffon, Hydra.
EFFECT ON MOVEMENT: No effect.
EFFECT ON STRIKING: A native character adds two dice when striking down across a Dune. A non-native character loses one die when striking up across a Dune. A strike made across non-Dune hexsides cannot carry-over up across a Dune hexside.
EFFECT ON RANGESTRIKING: A rangestrike may cross a single Dune only if the rangestriker of target occupies the to which the Dune is connected.  A rangestrike may cross two Dunes only if the rangestriker and the target occupy those Dune’s hexes (exception: see 13.5).

CLIFF
EFFECT ON MOVEMENT: Non-flying characters may not cross Cliffs.
EFFECT ON STRIKING: Characters cannot strike across a Cliff. Adjacent characters separated by Cliff.  Adjacent characters separated by a Cliff are not in contact with each other.
EFFECT ON RANGESTRIKING: A rangestrike may cross a Cliff only if rangestriker is atop that Cliff and the target is not at the base of that Cliff (and vise versa). A rangestrike may cross one Cliff before or after any number of Slopes provided the rangestriker or the target occupies the hex atop the Cliff. A rangestrike may cross a Cliff/Dune combination only if the rangestriker or the target occupies the Dune’s hex and the other one occupies the Cliff’s hex.  (Exception: see 13.5).

SLOPE
NATIVE: Ogre, Lion, Minotaur, Unicorn, Dragon, Colossus.
EFFECTS ON MOVEMENT: A non-flying non-native is slowed when moving up across a Slope.
EFFECT ON STRIKING: A native character adds one die when stinking down across a Slope. A non-native character loses a Skill factor when striking up across a Slope.
EFFECT ON RANGESTRIKING: A rangestrike may cross one or two Slopes only if the hex Slope is occupied by either the rangestriker or the target. A rangestrike may cross three slopes if the rangestriker or the target is directly atop the third Slope. A rangestrike may cross a Slope or Slopes before or after crossing a Cliff if the rangestriker or target occupies the hex atop the Cliff.  (Exception: see 13.5)

EFFECT ON MOVEMENT: A non-flying character is slowed when moving up across a Wall hexside.
EFFECT ON STRIKING: Any character gains a Skill- when striking up across Wall.
EFFECT ON RANGESTRIKING: Any rangestrike loses a Skill-factor for each Wall that it crosses going up. A rangestrike may cross a single Wall only if the rangestriker or the target occupies the hex to which that Wall is connected.  Rangestrikes may cross two Walls only if either the rangestriker or the target occupies the Tower’s center hex one neither one occupies a hex directly beneath any of the outer Walls. (Exception see 13.5) 

CHARACTER CHART (3.5)

| TYPE        | POWER   | SKILL   | RANGE     |  FLY  |  VALUE   |
| ----------- | ------- | ------- | --------- | ----- | -------- |
| LORDS                                                          |
| Angel       |   6     |   4     |   -       |   yes |  24      |
| Archangel   |   9     |   4     |   -       |   yes |  36      |
| Titan       |   x*    |   4     |   -       |   no  |  ??      |
| ----------- | ------- | ------- | --------- | ----- | -------- |
| DEMI-LORDS
| Guardian    |  12     |  2      |  -        |   yes |  24      |
| Warlock     |  5      |  4      |  2        |   no  |  20      |
| ----------- | ------- | ------- | --------- | ----- | -------- |
| CREATURES
| Behemoth    |  8      |  3      |  -        |   no  |  24      |
| Centaur     |  3      |  4      |  -        |   no  |  12      |
| Colossus    |  10     |  4      |  -        |   no  |  40      |
| Cyclops     |  9      |  2      |  -        |   no  |  18      |
| Dragon      |  9      |  3      |  4        |   yes |  27      |
| Gargoyle    |  4      |  3      |  -        |   yes |  12      |
| Giant       |  7      |  4      |  3        |   no  |  28      |
| Gorgon      |  6      |  3      |  3        |   yes |  18      |
| Griffon     |  5      |  4      |  -        |   yes |  20      |
| Hydra       |  10     |  3      |  5        |   no  |  30      |
| Lion        |  5      |  3      |  -        |   no  |  15      |
| Minotaur    |  4      |  4      |  2        |   no  |  16      |
| Ogre        |  6      |  2      |  -        |   no  |  12      |
| Ranger      |  4      |  4      |  2        |   yes |  16      |
| Serpent     |  18     |  2      |  -        |   no  |  36      |
| Troll       |  8      |  2      |  -        |   no  |  16      |
| Unicorn     |  6      |  4      |  -        |   no  |  24      |
| Warbear     |  6      |  3      |  -        |   no  |  18      |
| Wyvern      |  7      |  3      |  -        |   yes |  21      |

*See Rulebook, section 19.1. 


STRIKE CHART (12.7)

                        Attacker

                    1   2   3   4   5
                  ----------------------
               2  |  5   4   3   2   1
 defender      3  |  6   5   4   3   2
               4  |  6   6   5   4   3

                     strike numbers
                
                
